Identifying a hazard is only the first step.
To manage it effectively, we must assess the level of risk it presents.
Risk assessment is a systematic process of thinking about what could go wrong.
You ask two key questions: First, what is the likelihood that someone will be harmed by this hazard?
And second, if they are harmed, how severe would the injury be?
For example, an exposed wire in a busy walkway has a high likelihood of contact and can cause severe harm,
making it a high-risk hazard that requires immediate attention.
To control these risks, we use a strategy called the Hierarchy of Controls.
This is a ranked list of control measures, from most effective to least effective.
The most effective control is Elimination—getting rid of the hazard completely.
For example, de-energizing a circuit before working on it eliminates the electrical hazard.
If you can't eliminate it, you try Substitution—replacing the hazard with a safer alternative, like using a battery-powered tool instead
of a corded one.
Next are Engineering Controls, which physically separate people from the hazard.
This could be putting a permanent guard over exposed electrical components.
After that come Administrative Controls, which change how people work.
This includes procedures like Lockout/Tagout, posting warning signs, and providing training.
The final and least effective control is Personal Protective Equipment, or PPE.
While essential, PPE is the last line of defense because it doesn't remove the hazard itself; it only provides a
barrier that can fail or be used incorrectly.
Always aim to control hazards as high up the hierarchy as possible.